[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: My guest today is Shashi Tharoor and we are going to be talking about his new book, The
[Guest]: Paradoxical Prime Minister, which focuses on the many contradictions of Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: Now, Tharoor is an MP of the Congress Party, so you would expect him to write an anti-Modi
[Guest]: book.
[Guest]: But this book isn't simplistic and one-sided at all.
[Guest]: And the facts and arguments in them speak for themselves.
[Guest]: He was very kind to give me an hour of his time on a very busy day for him.
[Guest]: We recorded late at night over Skype and I overshot the time and couldn't ask him all
[Guest]: the questions I wanted to.
[Guest]: But he was very forthright in all his answers to what I did ask.
[Guest]: We don't talk about only Modi in this chat, by the way, but also address multiple questions
[Guest]: about the nature of our politics, the idea of India and the paradoxes within the Congress
[Guest]: Party itself.
[Guest]: But before we go to that conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Guest]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art but can't really afford to have paintings
[Guest]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Guest]: Well, worry no more.
[Guest]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Guest]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Guest]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Guest]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Guest]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Guest]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Guest]: and artists get royalties on sale, just like authors do.
[Guest]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Guest]: with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Guest]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Guest]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra.
[Guest]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Guest]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Guest]: That's colors with an OU.
[Guest]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Guest]: That's IVM for IVM podcast.
[Guest]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Tharoor, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, hi, how are you?
[Guest]: I mean, good to good to be with you.
[Guest]: Thanks so much.
[Guest]: And I requested this interview really to talk about your wonderful book, The Paradoxical
[Guest]: Prime Minister, which I enjoyed reading a lot.
[Guest]: But as it happens, we are recording on January 2nd.
[Guest]: And yesterday, Mr. Modi gave a rather paradoxical interview as well.
[Guest]: What did you think of that?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I have to confess that I was actually doing something else myself and didn't watch
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But I read the excerpts in the newspapers and I've now got hold of the transcript, which
[Amit Varma]: I haven't fully read.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a bit taken aback by both his very defensive tone and his the fact that he actually didn't
[Amit Varma]: offer any new compelling reasons why we should, as Indian voters, want to reward him for his
[Amit Varma]: five years in office.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, all the Achyutini promise haven't come for anybody.
[Amit Varma]: He is defensive about demonetization, which was a disaster for large numbers of our population.
[Amit Varma]: And some of the vainglorious boasts about the love of crores of people for him make
[Amit Varma]: me wonder whether he's living in his own bubble and doesn't see the damage he's done in this
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Amit Varma]: And that's perceived by the voters of this country.
[Guest]: One of the things that struck me about your book was the title of the book, where you
[Guest]: called it the paradoxical prime minister and not the hypocritical prime minister, which
[Guest]: seems to indicate that you sort of gave him the benefit of the doubt to start with.
[Guest]: And you yourself were befuddled by kind of what went wrong.
[Guest]: So can you tell me a little bit about your journey of how you looked at Narendra Modi
[Amit Varma]: over time?
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, as I've described in the book, I mean, I obviously when I was in the States
[Amit Varma]: when 2002 happened, and I shared everybody's anger and shame and revulsion at the horrors
[Amit Varma]: that were perpetrated in Gujarat in 2002, and therefore the fact that Narendra Modi
[Amit Varma]: had presided over all of this and in many accounts was seen as culpable for having encouraged
[Amit Varma]: some of the worst elements, all of that made me look at him as scant.
[Amit Varma]: I therefore didn't ever make any effort to meet him and met him entirely by accident,
[Amit Varma]: sort of backstage at a lunch at the Prabhasi Bharatiya Divas in Chennai in January of 2009,
[Amit Varma]: and was very pleasantly surprised because he was impressive, he was engaging, and what
[Amit Varma]: he had to say was not stuff that I could have expected from the, shall we say, the accounts
[Amit Varma]: of him that had demonized him.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if you want me to recount one of the tales, but I mean, I remember saying
[Amit Varma]: to him, for example, you know, why did you allow all this to happen?
[Amit Varma]: And he said, I did everything I could.
[Amit Varma]: I called in the army.
[Amit Varma]: When there was no joy in that, I then went on to, you know, what the situation is today
[Amit Varma]: for Muslims in Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: I said, I believe a sort of ghetto has been created, a sort of mini Pakistan, as people
[Amit Varma]: call it, and is that healthy for the future of Gujarat?
[Amit Varma]: And he said, they prefer it that way.
[Amit Varma]: So that conversation wasn't going anywhere else, and then I said, well, look, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the concerns is that you're not doing anything for Muslims in Gujarat in the aftermath
[Amit Varma]: of all of this.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, let me tell you a story.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, you know, this is exactly the charge that was laid on me by a commission
[Amit Varma]: that had come from Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: I assume this was the Sachar commission, but he didn't use the term.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, these people came and they came to my office and they said, we hear you've
[Amit Varma]: done nothing for Muslims in Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: So he said, sit down and write.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, they all took out their notebooks and their pens very dutifully.
[Amit Varma]: And I looked at them and I said, you write, I'm saying this, I have done nothing for Muslims
[Amit Varma]: in Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, they took out their pens and their notebooks and they started writing furiously
[Amit Varma]: that I've done nothing for Muslims in Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: And he's a very good storyteller.
[Amit Varma]: So he paused dramatically.
[Amit Varma]: And then he said, write this also.
[Amit Varma]: I have done nothing for Hindus in Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: And then as they also looked up with surprise, he said, I have only worked for Gujaratis.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I must say, that was a very effective story.
[Amit Varma]: It's the kind of message you expect from a secular political leader.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought that was a that was a.
[Amit Varma]: So I went to a feeling there was something here about this guy that perhaps the earlier
[Amit Varma]: accounts of his conduct in 2002 and so on had not captured.
[Amit Varma]: And then I saw another side of him, which I couldn't and my lawyers won't allow me to
[Amit Varma]: be explicit about what it was he said.
[Amit Varma]: But when I was minister of state for external affairs a few months after this episode, less
[Amit Varma]: than a year after this episode, the UAE authorities in the country I was visiting asked me to
[Amit Varma]: intervene on an unusual problem they were having, which was that their company, Dubai
[Amit Varma]: Ports World, had bought up the British company P&O, which is managing a number of Indian
[Amit Varma]: ports.
[Amit Varma]: So all the contracts had to be rewritten to change P&O to Dubai Ports World.
[Amit Varma]: It was basically the same people, the same staff and managers, but it was merely a legal
[Amit Varma]: exercise.
[Amit Varma]: And whereas in every state it had worked very smoothly, in Gujarat they were having a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And could I do something about it?
[Amit Varma]: So I, taking advantage of this earlier encounter with him in January, I called Narendra Modi,
[Amit Varma]: chief minister of Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: He was very prompt in taking the call.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, look, this is what I'm doing.
[Amit Varma]: I'm in the UAE on official visit.
[Amit Varma]: And there seems to be this problem, you know.
[Amit Varma]: It's a very routine matter.
[Amit Varma]: What's the issue here?
[Amit Varma]: Why can't we just sign this and get it done with?
[Amit Varma]: And he said something which, as I said, I'm not allowed legally to quote, but which made
[Amit Varma]: it very clear that he was not going to do so.
[Amit Varma]: And he explained, he said, if you want the UAE to invest in my states, by all means,
[Amit Varma]: tell them to come to the interior and I will give them land and electricity and good roads
[Amit Varma]: and drinking water and all the connections they want.
[Amit Varma]: But I will not be giving them a port because I don't want to have Islamic terrorists running
[Amit Varma]: around my state.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this kind of thinking, this kind of talk was, to my mind, somewhat more revelatory
[Amit Varma]: of the Narendra Modi who I'd heard less sort of flattering things about.
[Amit Varma]: And then, of course, we had the Narendra Modi of the election campaign a few years later,
[Amit Varma]: the man who became the prime ministerial candidate of the BJP, having really built up a reputation
[Amit Varma]: for somewhat incendiary campaigning in Gujarat that was hostile to minorities, that was hostile
[Amit Varma]: to that was very overtly Hindutva oriented.
[Amit Varma]: And then he starts, particularly in the immediate aftermath of his victory, saying the most
[Amit Varma]: amazingly liberal things, the sabka saad, sabka vikas, for instance, or the assurance
[Amit Varma]: that I will be a prime minister for all Indians, or saying that the Constitution is my only
[Amit Varma]: holy book and the parliament is the temple of democracy, moving away from that aggressively
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva identity he had earlier cultivated.
[Amit Varma]: And so, yes, I was prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt at that time, because
[Amit Varma]: my view was that, first of all, one has to respect the electorate, which has put him
[Amit Varma]: there and they've just put him there.
[Amit Varma]: We can't act as if we have contempt for their electoral votes.
[Amit Varma]: But equally, by applauding the sentiments that he's expressing, we are now laying very
[Amit Varma]: clearly the yardstick by which his future action should be judged.
[Amit Varma]: We are applauding these things that you have said, these liberal pronouncements, and we
[Amit Varma]: will judge you by your ability to fulfill and live up to these yardsticks, these liberal
[Amit Varma]: pronouncements.
[Amit Varma]: That was the spirit in which I welcomed his initial remarks.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, it wasn't very well understood in my own party, and I was pilloried and so
[Amit Varma]: on by many.
[Amit Varma]: But within six months of his assent, I had recanted.
[Amit Varma]: I published a book called India Shastra, Reflections on the Nation in Our Time, in December 2014.
[Amit Varma]: I think the copyright page for publishers reads as January 2015.
[Amit Varma]: But in that I wrote, in the introduction to what was a collection of essays that had been
[Amit Varma]: published over the preceding six or seven years, in the introduction I wrote that Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Modi really represents a contradiction because he says all these very liberal things, but
[Amit Varma]: he rests for political support and viability on the most illiberal elements in Indian society,
[Amit Varma]: the RSS types, the Hindutva types, the anti-science, the rewriting history elements, all of these
[Amit Varma]: because they love jihadis and the ghar wapasi types, all of whom had emerged from the woodwork
[Amit Varma]: in those first few months.
[Amit Varma]: And I said that in this contradiction may lie the seeds of his future failure.
[Amit Varma]: And this was published in December 2014.
[Amit Varma]: So when I wrote the paradoxical Prime Minister, I was able to begin with the words, I told
[Amit Varma]: you so.
[Amit Varma]: And to that degree, my own journey, as you put it, Amit, had in a sense been vindicated,
[Amit Varma]: almost as if Mr. Modi spent four years proving me right.
[Guest]: Which is very gracious of him.
[Guest]: And in your book, you do a beautiful job of documenting, you know, the various paradoxical
[Guest]: aspects of Modi.
[Guest]: You know, I noted down nine of them while reading the book.
[Guest]: But before I ask you about them, I want to ask you some broader questions about broader
[Guest]: paradoxes to do with politics and India.
[Guest]: And the first of those is that it has always seemed to me that the imperatives of politics
[Guest]: make it impossible for anyone who enters politics to actually hold on to whatever principles
[Guest]: they might have.
[Guest]: Because once you enter politics, you have to make compromises, you have to cater to
[Guest]: your interest groups who fund you, you have to cater to different vote banks.
[Guest]: And you have to, you know, cynically pursue the end over the means.
[Guest]: And it can even be morally corrosive.
[Guest]: Now, as someone who himself has had a very distinguished career in public life at the
[Guest]: UN and as a novelist and a writer, and who joined politics rather late, is that something
[Guest]: you'd have any views on?
[Guest]: Is it really what are the tugs on the pulse like?
[Amit Varma]: So what you said is right, that to a great extent, any democratically elected politician
[Amit Varma]: has to be responsive to voters, to backers, to funders, all of these sources, everything
[Amit Varma]: you said is true.
[Amit Varma]: But that doesn't mean you sell your soul, because if you did, then what are you contributing
[Amit Varma]: to the nation's political values and the political discourse?
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me that something I realized even at the UN was that you had to have ideals.
[Amit Varma]: If you didn't have ideals, you shouldn't be at the UN because you may as well go off and
[Amit Varma]: be a banker or a lawyer or an accountant or whatever else, where you can mortgage your
[Amit Varma]: ideals to the service of your client and merely judge your success by the bottom line in your
[Amit Varma]: bank account.
[Amit Varma]: But if you are in an organization like the UN, and the same logic applies to politics,
[Amit Varma]: you must have ideals, you must have principles, you must have things you seek to pursue, but
[Amit Varma]: you must have the maturity and the wisdom to realize you can only pursue them within
[Amit Varma]: the limitations of what is politically possible.
[Amit Varma]: So the UN, I had to be responsive to 192 member states and the Security Council, the 15 very
[Amit Varma]: powerful countries.
[Amit Varma]: I can't sit around acting as if I own the world.
[Amit Varma]: I don't.
[Amit Varma]: I am an employee of the United Nations organization, which is in turn controlled by 192 governments.
[Amit Varma]: And there is an interplay of interests, beliefs, concerns, policy preferences of these governments
[Amit Varma]: in which I will have to make the right judgment as to what compromises to make.
[Amit Varma]: And the judgments I make are essentially where my values and principles are tested.
[Amit Varma]: Now you apply that logic to Indian politics, what happens is this.
[Amit Varma]: There are some things, for example, that I find I cannot say because they're at variance
[Amit Varma]: with the policies adopted by my party.
[Amit Varma]: Now if I were completely cynical, I'd swallow my own beliefs and mouth the party line.
[Amit Varma]: If I say, look, I understand that it's important for the party to take the stand it's taking.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not going to say what I don't believe.
[Amit Varma]: I could have a very different approach in which where I speak, I speak of my own conviction,
[Amit Varma]: and where I can't agree with my party, I just choose to stay silent.
[Amit Varma]: That's one way of limiting the extent to which you're compromising your convictions.
[Amit Varma]: Another example would come from when you're talking about responding to voters.
[Amit Varma]: You listen to your voters.
[Amit Varma]: That is extremely important.
[Amit Varma]: And when you find that your voters feel strongly enough about something, you have all the more
[Amit Varma]: an obligation to listen to them because you are their representative.
[Amit Varma]: If at the end of the day they personalize you, that their beliefs matter, then you do
[Amit Varma]: choose to compromise in your position.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if you find that they are wrongheaded, you can argue to them and try and educate
[Amit Varma]: them to see things in your point of view.
[Amit Varma]: So I found myself both happening.
[Amit Varma]: That is on Section 377, for example, the vast majority of my voters disagreed with me.
[Amit Varma]: And I had to, in various occasions, to people from the church, to people of my voters, explain
[Amit Varma]: my position on 377.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I took care to stress this is not about sex.
[Amit Varma]: It's about freedom.
[Amit Varma]: It's about the rights of Indian citizens like you and me to be themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And that argument I did not compromise on, even though had there been a poll taken, the
[Amit Varma]: vast majority of my voters would have been against my stand on Section 377.
[Amit Varma]: But they came around in the end.
[Amit Varma]: And once the court, the Supreme Court, took the decision it did, I actually looked good
[Amit Varma]: in retrospect in many of their eyes.
[Amit Varma]: Then you take something like Sabarimana, where the vast majority of my constituents disagreed
[Amit Varma]: with my initial position.
[Amit Varma]: And I came around to the realization that I had been wrong in framing the issue merely
[Amit Varma]: in terms of my familiar categories of principles of equality and constitutionalism.
[Amit Varma]: And that when you're touching matters of religious faith, you are actually talking about something
[Amit Varma]: that goes very deep into the heart of people's beliefs and worship.
[Amit Varma]: And so I came around to becoming an explainer of their concerns rather than somebody who
[Amit Varma]: would have stuck to what all my normal liberal constituency expected of me.
[Amit Varma]: And as a result, of course, I have been denounced by the very people who on most other issues
[Amit Varma]: I would have seen as my friends.
[Amit Varma]: Would I have come to that conclusion if I had not been an elected political representative
[Amit Varma]: in Kerala, meeting people every day who were expressing the passion of their views?
[Amit Varma]: Very clearly, no.
[Amit Varma]: If I had just been a liberal columnist or writer sitting either in New York or in New
[Amit Varma]: Delhi, I probably would never have changed my mind on Sabarimana.
[Amit Varma]: So their politics did bring about a change, and it's part of the compromise that democratic
[Amit Varma]: representation involves.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't see myself as having mortgaged my principles.
[Amit Varma]: If their arguments had not convinced me of their own merit, I would not have changed.
[Amit Varma]: But the realization that when you frame the issue as one of sanctity, that you're touching
[Amit Varma]: on profound matters of faith and of religious practice, that just south of Trivandrum is
[Amit Varma]: in Kanyakumari, the famous Kumari Amman temple from which Kanyakumari gets its name to the
[Amit Varma]: virgin form of the goddess, where men are not allowed in the inner sanctum.
[Amit Varma]: And if for thousands of years men have not been allowed there, if you've applied the
[Amit Varma]: Supreme Court's gender equality principle, men will be able to go there.
[Amit Varma]: And the day a man steps into that sanctum sanctorum, the sanctity of that temple for
[Amit Varma]: millions of women worshippers is completely destroyed.
[Amit Varma]: And you have to ask yourself as a political representative what is right, the principle
[Amit Varma]: of gender equality or the meaning of this temple as a sanctified place to its believers
[Amit Varma]: and worshippers?
[Amit Varma]: It becomes a very different debate when you think of it that way.
[Guest]: Yeah, matter of colliding principles.
[Guest]: I completely get that.
[Guest]: And my sort of, I mean, I don't want to derail this by, you know, focusing on Sabarimala.
[Guest]: So just moving on from there, my slightly related question there is that, is it then
[Guest]: entirely fair to judge politicians by how much they implement the promises they might
[Guest]: have made when the promises could have been fairly high minded?
[Guest]: But if you consider the incentives, once they get to power, they include in general, two
[Guest]: particular kinds of incentives, that is incentives of the interest groups, which put them in
[Guest]: power and which will want them to implement favorable policies.
[Guest]: And number two, the incentives which come from whichever vote banks they might be cultivating,
[Guest]: and their actions might run inimicable to the general interest.
[Guest]: Because, you know, in one case, they'd be working on behalf of interest groups.
[Guest]: On the other hand, they might have to cater to a certain kind of identity politics that
[Guest]: has dominated our discourse through the decades.
[Guest]: And in the case of Modi, you could argue that there's even a sort of a third force, which
[Guest]: is the RSS, which he's always been part of, which is exerting its own kind of nativist
[Guest]: pressures.
[Guest]: And is it even realistic to then assume that all of this high minded liberal talk, as you
[Guest]: put it, the commitment to pluralism, and so on, can actually, you know, play out in action?
[Guest]: And would anyone in his place be able to do something?
[Amit Varma]: OK, so as a general principle, I would say that most of the promises politicians make
[Amit Varma]: do not conflict with the interests of the majority of voters, or they wouldn't make
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: So by and large, when a politician says something high minded or otherwise, it's because he
[Amit Varma]: knows his voters want to hear it.
[Amit Varma]: And if he therefore is unable to fulfill it, he needs to explain to his voters why he hasn't.
[Amit Varma]: I've stuck to that policy in my two terms in office.
[Amit Varma]: I explain everything that I promised to do and how I've tried to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And if I've failed, I explain why I failed and leave it to the voters to judge whether
[Amit Varma]: I should be blamed or not for that failure.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, I think, an important part of political accountability.
[Amit Varma]: But in the case of Mr. Modi, it was a more cynical exercise.
[Amit Varma]: He actually knew that the core Hindu vote was his anyway.
[Amit Varma]: That vote wasn't going to go away.
[Amit Varma]: And so the so-called high minded statements you're referring to were made to attract the
[Amit Varma]: undecided voters who were not Hindutva oriented, who were possibly even directly negative about
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva, but who were attracted by the other aspects of his message, particularly the developmental
[Amit Varma]: message.
[Amit Varma]: And the cynicism of that is, let me take you to a different political environment to give
[Amit Varma]: you a parallel.
[Amit Varma]: In America, it is often critiqued that the Republican Party runs on a campaign involving
[Amit Varma]: guns, God and gays, the sort of cultural nationalism of the American right, and thereby attracts
[Amit Varma]: the votes of a lot of working class people, small town people, salaried people and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: And having come to power on that, it then unmasks its real agenda, which is to put more
[Amit Varma]: money in the pockets of the plutocrats.
[Amit Varma]: And it essentially devotes its political energy to financial and fiscal policies that benefit
[Amit Varma]: the tiny mass of their supporters and backers and funders.
[Amit Varma]: That is, in other words, cultural nationalism becoming the bait.
[Amit Varma]: And then you switch.
[Amit Varma]: It's called bait and switch.
[Amit Varma]: You switch to your real agenda, which is economics.
[Amit Varma]: I would suggest that what we've seen with Mr. Modi is also bait and switch.
[Amit Varma]: But it's the exact reverse of the Republican approach, which is that economics has been
[Amit Varma]: the bait.
[Amit Varma]: He's talked about Vikas.
[Amit Varma]: He's talked about Gujarat Inc.
[Amit Varma]: He's talked about how much he's been able to do and how much he's going to do for India.
[Amit Varma]: And people have voted for him.
[Amit Varma]: And then having come to power, instead of focusing on results in that area, he has merely
[Amit Varma]: unleashed some of the most retrogressive forces of cultural nationalism across the country.
[Amit Varma]: And the only conclusion one can inescapably draw is that that must have been his real
[Amit Varma]: agenda, that the economics was all talk and the real action is in cow vigilantism, is
[Amit Varma]: in car, Roper sees and love Jihad is in communal polarization, is in the murder even of Muslims
[Amit Varma]: for being too Muslim is in the compulsory ization of Bharat Mata, etc., etc., etc.
[Amit Varma]: All of that cultural nationalism has been dominant articulation and priority of this
[Amit Varma]: government having won votes on the basis of something quite different.
[Guest]: I couldn't agree with you more.
[Guest]: I think, you know, many of the people who might have been taken in by his promises of
[Guest]: development should now listen to his words and say that, you know, you fooled me once,
[Guest]: shame on you, fool me twice, shame on me.
[Guest]: But my question was really more about a broader sort of question about politics in general.
[Guest]: The next paradox I want to ask you about is a paradox of the idea of India.
[Guest]: You know, Mr. Tagore's phrase and something that, you know, you bring up in your book,
[Guest]: and you know, the objection that you know, at length, you quote the Indian upadhyay talking
[Guest]: about the constitution and railing against it.
[Guest]: And I think there is a question there that must be addressed by liberal elites such as
[Guest]: you and me.
[Guest]: And it was in fact, liberal elites who framed the constitution and you could make a criticism
[Guest]: that look, the constitution didn't actually reflect the soul of the people.
[Guest]: It was these westernized liberal elites in a sense, Nehru and Gang were really British
[Guest]: liberals in a sense, in you know, where their thinking came from.
[Guest]: And I mean that in a good way.
[Guest]: But one, there is that paradox that forcing a liberal way of life on an illiberal country,
[Guest]: isn't that act itself illiberal, you know, and that's one paradox.
[Guest]: And the other paradox that then is that if now and I'm not saying this is necessarily
[Guest]: the case, but if now the country is to assert its illiberalism and want the constitution
[Guest]: to reflect that, on what grounds are we to stand in the way?
[Amit Varma]: Well, that's a very interesting question.
[Amit Varma]: I have to say that it's something which one doesn't have easy answers for, because I actually
[Amit Varma]: accept the critique that the constitution, as the Indian panther put it, is full of imported
[Amit Varma]: Western ideas written by Anglophile lawyers in English, which is not from his point of
[Amit Varma]: view, an authentic Indian language.
[Amit Varma]: And in these circumstances, you're really looking at a question that says, I'm prepared
[Amit Varma]: to say, so what if these ideas are good, if these ideas are actually ideas that in many,
[Amit Varma]: many ways would improve the lives of Indians, why shouldn't we adopt them even if they've
[Amit Varma]: come from abroad?
[Amit Varma]: Is any culture truly pristine?
[Amit Varma]: Hasn't India been open to external influences since time immemorial?
[Amit Varma]: Didn't we welcome these outsiders when they came, whether it was the Jews fleeing the
[Amit Varma]: destruction of their temple by the Babylonians and then by the Romans, whether it was Islam
[Amit Varma]: coming to the south of India as a message, as it were, during the lifetime of the prophet,
[Amit Varma]: whether it was Zoroastrianism, the Parsis coming as refugees fleeing Muslim persecution
[Amit Varma]: in Persia in the seventh century.
[Amit Varma]: All of these examples suggest to me that you actually have a society which has had a lot
[Amit Varma]: of openness to various influences and which, as Swami Vivekananda argued, has always found
[Amit Varma]: the secret of its survival in the acceptance of difference, the acceptance that other people
[Amit Varma]: of other ways were doing things.
[Amit Varma]: So it may be, in your view, a somewhat illiberal society, and if you look at caste relations
[Amit Varma]: and so on, it certainly does seem illiberal, but it has also been a society which, by the
[Amit Varma]: practice of acceptance, and I stress the word acceptance rather than merely tolerance, has
[Amit Varma]: actually allowed multiple forms of worship to exist and flourish on Indian soil.
[Amit Varma]: And the strength of that is what I think makes India ripe for a liberal constitution.
[Amit Varma]: It is not a liberal imposition on illiberal country.
[Amit Varma]: It is a liberal overlay on a system which, because of its respect for difference and
[Amit Varma]: its acceptance for difference, permits, if you like, modern constitutional principles
[Amit Varma]: to be addressed in this older society.
[Amit Varma]: One of the interesting distinctions that this causes is the following.
[Amit Varma]: In Western democracies, the individual citizen is the only one who has rights.
[Amit Varma]: In India, we have the individual rights that have come to us through Western democracy,
[Amit Varma]: but we also have community and group rights.
[Amit Varma]: We recognize things like personal laws of different religious communities, for which
[Amit Varma]: there is no equivalent in the United States or in most Western democracies.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what does this mean?
[Amit Varma]: This means that you have got an overlay, but that overlay is not incompatible with the
[Amit Varma]: idea of rights that already pre-existed in that society, in our society.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't consider it illiberal, and I'll take you back to the beginning of your initial
[Amit Varma]: comment.
[Amit Varma]: I would argue that the liberalism that you say might have been an imposition on this
[Amit Varma]: society is actually what has made a lot of the evolution of this society possible.
[Amit Varma]: That without the constitution of 1950, a Mayawati, a Dalit woman, who for 3,000 years, it would
[Amit Varma]: have been unthinkable to see a Dalit woman ruling the land of Arya Vrata, this Dalit
[Amit Varma]: woman has been elected three times as chief minister of UP, thanks to that liberal constitution.
[Amit Varma]: A man of very humble origins who sold tea on a railway station platform has become prime
[Amit Varma]: minister of India because of the liberal constitution and the institutions that were created and
[Amit Varma]: nurtured under it.
[Amit Varma]: So I would argue that in fact, our society needs this constitution, needs these liberal
[Amit Varma]: values and is what it is because these values have shaped us for 71 years.
[Guest]: I take your point, though I'm a little sceptical about how individual rights and group rights
[Guest]: can coexist, because it seems to me that there is a dissonance there, which eventually leads
[Guest]: to conflict.
[Amit Varma]: But my other question there is that...
[Amit Varma]: Let me answer that before you move on from it, which is, to my mind, I've actually written
[Amit Varma]: an article in the Northern Journal of International Law about 30 years ago, making this point
[Amit Varma]: that they coexist only in a context in which the individual has the right to opt out.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, culture means that, yes, you can have Muslim personal law, but it can't
[Amit Varma]: be coercion.
[Amit Varma]: Culture should not be coercion.
[Amit Varma]: If a Muslim woman chooses to marry a non-Muslim or marry a Muslim under civil law, she has
[Amit Varma]: the right to do so under our constitution.
[Amit Varma]: And that's essentially the argument that says, for those who wish to abide by it, group rights
[Amit Varma]: exist.
[Amit Varma]: For those who wish to opt out, the constitution protects their individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: And to my mind, that gives you the way in which the two can coexist.
[Guest]: Fair enough.
[Guest]: And, you know, if we accept that, let's say that to begin with, we have a liberal, relatively
[Guest]: liberal constitution, I still feel it's illiberal in many ways, in that it doesn't protect free
[Guest]: speech enough, and the right to property is not a fundamental right, and so on.
[Guest]: But leaving that aside, if we accept that the constitution is more liberal than society
[Guest]: is even today, then, you know, the question that brings me to is a question, you know,
[Guest]: how a society becomes liberal, is it a top down process, as you're saying it can be that
[Guest]: a constitution can play a part in that?
[Guest]: Or should it necessarily be a bottom up process?
[Guest]: Like, for example, you're in the political marketplace, you're part of the supply end
[Guest]: of the political marketplace, and there is a demand and you're catering to, and it's
[Guest]: always seemed to me that you have to change the demand and first at the battle is first
[Guest]: a cultural battle, and then a political battle.
[Guest]: And if you don't change the demand end, and if the demand end is largely illiberal, then
[Guest]: you're never going to get really liberal policies from the supply end, because politicians will
[Guest]: reflect society.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, and no, I mean, you're broadly right.
[Amit Varma]: And I can't claim that the preponderance of evidence would be against your argument, your
[Amit Varma]: argument is actually right.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I have noticed, particularly in the context of 377, that the judiciary has far
[Amit Varma]: more courage than politicians, because politicians don't think beyond the prejudices of their
[Amit Varma]: government, whereas the judiciary has no such fetters and is free to advocate certain principles
[Amit Varma]: and values that it holds dear.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, again, my counter argument involves precisely that, that the liberal constitution
[Amit Varma]: we have created has also created these different institutions.
[Amit Varma]: It's not as if the only change in our society is a change that can be voted for by a majority
[Amit Varma]: of members of Parliament.
[Amit Varma]: There are changes that are coming through the judicial route.
[Amit Varma]: Many would argue that there's a flurry of Supreme Court judgments over the last 15,
[Amit Varma]: 20 years have expanded the notion of women's rights in India way beyond anything that our
[Amit Varma]: society has known in the past, or that perhaps a government would have dared to introduce
[Amit Varma]: or a Parliament would have voted for.
[Amit Varma]: So let's accept that in a democracy, there are many institutions of democracy.
[Amit Varma]: The judiciary is one of them, and it sometimes thinks beyond what Parliament is capable of
[Amit Varma]: doing.
[Amit Varma]: But the media to which you belong is also an extremely important institution of democracy,
[Amit Varma]: and it can help promote change by what it depicts of cultural practices and social values.
[Amit Varma]: Certainly, the India in which I grew up and which I left at the age of 19 to go to graduate
[Amit Varma]: school in the West, and the India to which I returned at the age of 51, were very different
[Amit Varma]: Indias when it comes to things like, for example, sexual mores, when it comes to conspicuous
[Amit Varma]: consumption, when it comes to the overt public display of affluence, all sorts of things.
[Amit Varma]: A cultural change had occurred, and I think it was a change that was enabled by mass media,
[Amit Varma]: by media showing examples of all of these, by media showing that this was what was practiced
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere in the world, by media showing that the world was moving on and India should perhaps
[Amit Varma]: catch up, or some sections of India found it attractive to catch up with the rest of
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: So change comes in all sorts of ways, not just through politicians.
[Amit Varma]: Politicians in some cases can only reflect what their voters are prepared to tolerate.
[Amit Varma]: In some cases, they will have the courage of their convictions to take things forward.
[Amit Varma]: And in some cases, the politicians are operating in domains in which the public themselves
[Amit Varma]: don't know really any better or any worse.
[Amit Varma]: And so there is an educated role.
[Amit Varma]: When Manmohan Singh stood up in Parliament in 1991 and said, as finance minister paraphrasing
[Amit Varma]: Victor Hugo, that no power on earth can stop an idea whose time has come, what was he saying?
[Amit Varma]: He was basically saying at that point that the economic underpinnings of your normal
[Amit Varma]: life in India that you've always known are suddenly going to change.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you can't say that a lot of voters would have asked for it, but they didn't know they
[Amit Varma]: could ask for it, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Most voters in India were living within the protected and somewhat overregulated economy
[Amit Varma]: that we had up to then.
[Amit Varma]: But suddenly when everything became possible, when foreign goods could come in, when restrictions
[Amit Varma]: were lifted, when companies could expand, etc., etc., etc., the same people, the same
[Amit Varma]: voters embraced these things.
[Amit Varma]: So it's only when it comes to matters that people are sensitive about, which are usually
[Amit Varma]: social, religious, cultural matters, that politicians are a bit more constrained.
[Amit Varma]: When it comes to things like economic policy, when it comes to things like most of the foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy issues in our country and so on, the voters do give politicians the freedom to
[Amit Varma]: pursue their convictions and their beliefs.
[Guest]: Fair enough.
[Guest]: Before I move on to talking about your book per se, just one final general question.
[Guest]: As your anecdote at the start about Modi indicated, where he said that I do nothing for the Muslims
[Guest]: of Gujarat, I do nothing for the Hindus of Gujarat, I focus on the Gujaratis, which is
[Guest]: a remarkable rhetorical turn.
[Guest]: And he is a master of rhetoric.
[Guest]: And it's often been said about him that he focuses purely on optics, that he's great
[Guest]: at campaigning and not so much governing.
[Guest]: And one always assumed that this is going to come back and bite him at some point, maybe
[Guest]: 2019.
[Guest]: But my counterpoint to that is that maybe he sees something we don't, which is that
[Guest]: maybe only the optics matters in the sense that what has happened over the last few years,
[Guest]: exacerbated to some extent by social media, but not entirely, is that, you know, the journalist
[Guest]: Walter Lippmann in the early 1900s wrote a book called Public Opinion, where the first
[Guest]: chapter was titled, The World Out There and The World Inside Our Heads, where he pointed
[Guest]: out that people construct a world inside their heads, and then whether or not it corresponds
[Guest]: to the real world outside, they stick to that world.
[Guest]: And it seems to me that social media makes it possible to meet like minded people, even
[Guest]: if they're fellow bigots or mythogenists or whatever, who might validate those worst impulses,
[Guest]: and you know, strengthen your belief in them.
[Guest]: And it's very easy to form echo chambers, and then be imprisoned in those narratives,
[Guest]: which cannot be touched by reality.
[Guest]: So once you believe that narrative, for example, if you believe in narrative that Hindu civilization
[Guest]: is under threat, and everything was glorious once and blah, blah, blah, then what is happening
[Guest]: outside doesn't really matter so much like after demonetization, which I thought was
[Guest]: a disaster and the biggest assault on property rights in human history, I was sure they would
[Guest]: lose in UP.
[Guest]: But they won by a landslide.
[Guest]: And it seemed to me that what had actually happened, the suffering that people had gone
[Guest]: through didn't affect the way they voted because it already made up a narrative inside the
[Guest]: heads.
[Guest]: And if that is the case, maybe Mr. Modi is smarter than we think, because he knows then
[Guest]: on that only the narrative matters and the reality of things doesn't matter.
[Guest]: So to hell with governance.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's a very depressing thought.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think the narrative worked for Mr. Modi in UP because it was very soon after
[Amit Varma]: the elections, very soon after the demonetization of the elections took place.
[Amit Varma]: And there was still time for a very, very clever narrative to seize the imaginations
[Amit Varma]: of people.
[Amit Varma]: One of which, by the way, was oddly enough, the politics of class resentment.
[Amit Varma]: It was basically saying, yeah, you've suffered.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the rich have suffered much more.
[Amit Varma]: The rich are the guys who've really got hit because of this.
[Amit Varma]: So we did this for you.
[Amit Varma]: And the poor said, wow, yeah, you're right.
[Amit Varma]: You know, those rich guys have suffered.
[Amit Varma]: Let's reward Modi.
[Amit Varma]: But with time, that argument, that narrative doesn't hold, because the poor are able to
[Amit Varma]: see that they're the ones who lost jobs.
[Amit Varma]: They're the ones who lost their savings.
[Amit Varma]: They're the ones who suffered.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas the rich are back to being rich again and are carrying on oblivious.
[Amit Varma]: And they realize that that old narrative that Modi had sold them in the UP election doesn't
[Amit Varma]: work.
[Amit Varma]: And on top of that, that they've elected a deeply unsatisfactory government, which has
[Amit Varma]: let them down really in all sorts of ways, and which has created an environment in which
[Amit Varma]: the BJP's unpopularity is now being widely talked about in the regime of Yogi Adityanath.
[Amit Varma]: And for these reasons, I think that you may be right about the whole management of narrative
[Amit Varma]: as an answer in the short term.
[Amit Varma]: I don't believe it works indefinitely in the long term.
[Amit Varma]: And I do think that we're going to find in the elections of 2019, Modi is going to find
[Amit Varma]: it very difficult to spin the same yarn twice.
[Amit Varma]: How does a young man in Kanpur, who voted for Mr. Modi in 2014 because Modi painted
[Amit Varma]: this brilliant portrait of jobs sort of tumbling out of the woodwork for him because he's going
[Amit Varma]: to attract all this investment and create so much business, and he's going to get rid
[Amit Varma]: of all the sclerotic practices of the old regime, and jobs are going to be there, and
[Amit Varma]: this young man will have a job and five years later, the same guy doesn't have a job, none
[Amit Varma]: of the fantasies that were depicted for him have come true.
[Amit Varma]: Why would he vote for Modi again?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, how do you how long can a narrative be a substitute for the reality experienced
[Guest]: by the human person?
[Guest]: On that hopeful note, we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody.
[Unknown]: Welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure that you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcasts on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: So this week on Instagram, we asked everybody to tell us about their New Year's resolutions
[Unknown]: and we had some really interesting interactions with our audience on based on that.
[Unknown]: So if you'd like to get in touch with us, do check us out.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says Cyrus is joined by the habit coach Ashton doctor who talks about the importance
[Unknown]: of healthy habits, simple tricks to meditate and his new podcast, the habit coach.
[Unknown]: Speaking of the habit coach and three part series, Ashton shares his golden secrets to
[Unknown]: achieving New Year resolutions.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati podcast, Pawan is joined by Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan.
[Unknown]: They discuss India's success and failures as a republic and a democracy.
[Unknown]: On Thalle Harate, legal expert Allok Prasanna Kumar discusses the Supreme Court judgment
[Unknown]: on Aadhaar and its implication on citizens.
[Unknown]: On Geekfruit, Tejas, Jishnu and Rinkar do a recap of their favorite films from 2018.
[Unknown]: And on IBM Likes, Janan, Surbhi and Abbas give out some cool pop culture recommendations
[Unknown]: and discuss the new Netflix horror movie Bird Box starring Sandra Bullock.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you back to your show.
[Guest]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: I'm chatting with Shashi Tharoor about his brilliant book on Narendra Modi called the
[Guest]: paradoxical Prime Minister.
[Guest]: Mr. Tharoor, you outline a number of ways in which Modi is paradoxical in your book.
[Guest]: And the first one which strikes me as very interesting and which I think gave some hope
[Guest]: to a lot of liberal people who voted for Modi in 2014 was you spoke about how in Gujarat,
[Guest]: like it's actually a triple paradox.
[Guest]: He began as an RSS person.
[Guest]: But when he was chief minister of Gujarat, he actually marginalized a lot of the extreme
[Guest]: Hindu elements like the VHP and so on.
[Guest]: He fought with Togadia.
[Guest]: He kicked out Gurdan Duffadia from his cabinet, though he's, you know, back in his good books
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: And a lot of people assume that he might do the same when he is in power at the center
[Guest]: and that we won't go in this very Hindutva Bharat Mata ki Jai direction.
[Guest]: And instead, he will live up to his promises on development and be Vikash Purush instead
[Guest]: of Hindu Riddhe Samrat.
[Guest]: This I mean, did this take you by surprise?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I actually did think, as you said, that that's what he he he might do, because first
[Amit Varma]: of all, Vikash Purush is was what he tried to depict himself as for the bulk of his time
[Amit Varma]: in Gujarat, and therefore that became his calling card for the nation.
[Amit Varma]: But second, I thought that it's also a better thing to run for reelection on, because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the temporary satisfaction you get from beating people of other religions on the head
[Amit Varma]: is unlikely to be a sustainable asset, whereas improving people's livelihoods and making
[Amit Varma]: them feel good about themselves will obviously be new votes against.
[Amit Varma]: I was very much thinking that he would focus on that.
[Amit Varma]: But as I realized, as I said, within six months of his coming to power, it couldn't work for
[Amit Varma]: him that way, because his support base, the very people who needed to go out and knock
[Amit Varma]: on those doors and win those campaigns for him, actually happened to be people for whom
[Amit Varma]: the only thing that mattered was the Hindu Hridaya Samrat's work.
[Amit Varma]: And it is very, very sad in some ways that our own political and constitutional system
[Amit Varma]: kind of reinforced that, because we have elections somewhere or the other every six months, thanks
[Amit Varma]: to the vagaries of the parliamentary system.
[Amit Varma]: Some stay to the others going to the polls.
[Amit Varma]: And Modi, in his desire to consolidate power, became the nation's campaigner in chief, the
[Amit Varma]: Pradhan Pracharak, quite literally in the sense of campaigning, rather than the Pradhan
[Amit Varma]: Sevak that he claimed to be.
[Amit Varma]: He was not doing Desh Ka Seva, he was doing Bhaja Pa Ka Prachar.
[Amit Varma]: And in that process, what you saw throughout the country was a Modi who had to pander to
[Amit Varma]: the instincts of his followers, his campaigners, the guys who are going out knocking on doors
[Amit Varma]: and sticking up posters and banners, were the Hindutva elements, the RSS elements, the
[Amit Varma]: VHP and the Bajrang Dal.
[Amit Varma]: These were the characters who were there to support Mr. Modi so he could win state election
[Amit Varma]: after state election.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, his message became tailored entirely to them.
[Amit Varma]: And he was also handicapped in his ability to say something when they got out of hand
[Amit Varma]: and actually murdered people or flogged them on YouTube or stabbed them to death in a very
[Amit Varma]: disgracefully public manner.
[Amit Varma]: Then instead of disavowing them, as one would expect any decent prime minister to do in
[Amit Varma]: terms of exercising the moral leadership of the nation, Mr. Modi went mysteriously silent.
[Amit Varma]: But the reason was he couldn't afford to antagonize the very people without whose efforts he couldn't
[Amit Varma]: win all these states.
[Amit Varma]: So the whole thing became circular, you see, in this way.
[Guest]: And just as an aside, it's probably unfair to ask you this because you may not know him
[Guest]: well enough, but do you think he has any core beliefs of his own or is he sort of the quintessential
[Guest]: sociopath who'll do whatever it takes to further his immediate self-interest?
[Amit Varma]: That's a difficult question for me to answer because it's easy enough for an opposition
[Amit Varma]: MP to say the latter.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, there's something there in this in this man that makes me hesitate to just
[Amit Varma]: dismiss the possibility of the former.
[Amit Varma]: All I can say is his core beliefs seem to me to be much more to do with Hindutva rather
[Amit Varma]: than with the plus part.
[Amit Varma]: And I've talked about Modi-twa as Hindutva plus.
[Amit Varma]: But the plus part includes the Vikas Purush message somehow seem to be more tactical than
[Amit Varma]: core beliefs.
[Guest]: Another of your paradoxes actually feeds on from this and it's probably, you know, a natural
[Guest]: consequence of this, which is that he makes these pluralist statements once in a while
[Guest]: and you think, I mean, that's a fairly liberal thing to say.
[Guest]: But that is counterbalanced by his very polarizing campaign rhetoric, you know, which can be
[Guest]: very communal and ugly.
[Guest]: And at the same time, when he is in power as a prime minister and all of these things
[Guest]: happen, lynchings happen and so on, there is a silence that almost seems tacit.
[Guest]: And all of these kind of contradict each other.
[Guest]: But you know, as you said, this the pulls and pressures you just described explain this
[Guest]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the pulls and pressures do explain this.
[Guest]: You're quite right.
[Guest]: And yeah, and they also explain another paradox where he talks of the Constitution as a holy
[Guest]: book, but the RSS is, you know, holds a Manusmriti as a holy book.
[Guest]: So again, it's that paradox is also kind of explained by this.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not just that, you know, he actually says that Dindayal Upadhyay is his hero and
[Amit Varma]: mentor when he came, became prime minister, he insisted that every single ministry hold
[Amit Varma]: a seminar on the thoughts of Dindayal Upadhyay and he put Dindayal Upadhyay logos on all
[Amit Varma]: the ministry letterheads and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the fact of the matter is Dindayal Upadhyay may have been a very interesting and inspiring
[Amit Varma]: figure.
[Amit Varma]: But one thing he was absolutely clear about was that he despised the Constitution and
[Amit Varma]: wished to tear it up and discard it.
[Amit Varma]: So you cannot on hand say that the Constitution is a holy book and on the other hand say that
[Amit Varma]: you worship Dindayal Upadhyay.
[Amit Varma]: The two thoughts are fundamentally incompatible.
[Amit Varma]: Now one of these is insincere, and I believe it was the reference to the Constitution that
[Amit Varma]: was insincere.
[Amit Varma]: I think that Modi is indeed schooled in the Dindayal Upadhyay kind of approach.
[Amit Varma]: And ideally, he and his acolytes in the BJP do want to change the Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: But until they have the numbers in both houses, as well as in the state assemblies to amend
[Amit Varma]: the Constitution, they can't do it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, for the moment, tactically, it's useful to swear by the very Constitution
[Amit Varma]: that they're busy destroying the spirit of.
[Guest]: But when he speaks of the Constitution as a holy book, who is he really speaking to?
[Guest]: I mean, is it the case that he is secretly, he really wants the affection of the Lutyens
[Guest]: elite who he disparages so much?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think he wants the affection of the establishment, the media, the thinking classes
[Amit Varma]: and so on in this country.
[Amit Varma]: Or he wanted it at some point.
[Amit Varma]: I think he, my own view is that the gloves are going to come off in April of 2019.
[Amit Varma]: And we no longer see that kind of talk.
[Amit Varma]: But certainly I think he did want the affection of everybody.
[Amit Varma]: But more important, he wanted to disarm them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he couldn't necessarily win over a lot of these people in terms of affection.
[Amit Varma]: But he had to at least convey the impression that he was no threat to the fundamental consensus
[Amit Varma]: that had built this country.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the only way, with the Vikas message and so on, that he could build up the support
[Amit Varma]: base around the country that would enable him then to amend the Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: Don't forget that he succeeded to the tune of 20 state governments.
[Amit Varma]: He's now lost three.
[Amit Varma]: But he had 20 state governments in the BJP kitty as recently as the last month of 2018.
[Amit Varma]: And that means that he was well on his way to fulfilling his dream.
[Amit Varma]: He had, with the NDA, 333 seats in the Lok Sabha.
[Amit Varma]: And thanks to the state assemblies he now controlled, he was gradually creeping up to
[Amit Varma]: a convincing majority in the Rajya Sabha.
[Amit Varma]: With all of this, in say, three, four, five years' time, he would have been in a position
[Amit Varma]: to write the Hindutva constitution of his dreams.
[Amit Varma]: Now the fact is that it looks like the nation is going to stop him before he gets there.
[Amit Varma]: Or that even if he inevitably becomes the dominant party in the Rajya Sabha, that he's
[Amit Varma]: going to be stopped in the Lok Sabha in the 2019 general election.
[Amit Varma]: So then my fears will again be dialed down.
[Amit Varma]: But certainly I have no doubt, having looked at the convictions of the BJP and the Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: Brigade and the followers of Mr. Modi, that had he been able to retain this majority in
[Amit Varma]: the Lok Sabha and add to it in a few years a majority in the Rajya Sabha, that we would
[Amit Varma]: have seen him openly and nakedly saying, we need to strike certain words in the constitution,
[Amit Varma]: we need to make India Hindu Rashtra with the Hindu faith as the official faith of the country,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: All of these are things that he and his followers have long believed, and they would finally
[Amit Varma]: have been in a position to do it.
[Amit Varma]: But the other talk was a means, it seems to me, to put themselves in a position to do
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Guest]: And you know, another paradox that is a big paradox, and I imagine both you and I would
[Guest]: be upset that it's a paradox at all, is that he said all these beautiful things before
[Guest]: the elections about minimum government, maximum governance.
[Guest]: And as you point out, it's just the opposite.
[Guest]: We've had maximum government and minimum governance where, you know, you talk about the ideal
[Guest]: size of the cabinet and you say that, you know, one sort of rule of thumb was that it
[Guest]: should be around 10% of the Lok Sabha or about 55 or whatever.
[Guest]: And you even outline in great detail what you think the ideal number should be and why,
[Guest]: which is about 40-45, which, you know, the argument seemed very convincing to me.
[Guest]: And you have a telling anecdote about his early days about why he was drawn to the RSS
[Guest]: because, you know, it seemed to him that here was a group where everybody listened to one
[Guest]: leader, which shows how his thinking from a very early stage is sort of a top down thinking.
[Guest]: Now, you know, your expression of disappointment at him not living up to the slogan of minimum
[Guest]: government, maximum governance also leads me to another larger paradox, which is that
[Guest]: we have always been a nation of top down thinkers and large governments.
[Guest]: I mean, Modi might have around 80 ministers right now, as you pointed out, but Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh at 78 before this, as you mentioned in your book yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also true that we're the only country which has actually had to create a guideline
[Amit Varma]: saying no more than 15% of the strength of the two houses, because otherwise governments
[Amit Varma]: would have gone on and on appointing ministers and deputy ministers and parliamentary secretaries,
[Amit Varma]: because ultimately the big flaw in the parliamentary system, one which I've decried in a different
[Amit Varma]: book, India Shastra, is the fact that you are electing a legislator in order to form
[Amit Varma]: the executive, which is a fundamental, to my mind, a flaw in the entire British system,
[Amit Varma]: which we have taken on to ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And so what's happening is that once you get elected as part of the ruling party, what
[Amit Varma]: you want to do is become a monthly or at least hold some other position the government can
[Amit Varma]: give you.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the fact is that thanks to the official guideline of 15%, they can't do that.
[Amit Varma]: But even then, it's very striking that we have this incredibly centralized situation
[Amit Varma]: where what Mr. Modi has realized is you hand out these various portfolios or SOPs to people,
[Amit Varma]: but you keep all real power to yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So you have your 18 ministers in the Modi government, but of that only one, and that's
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Modi himself, actually has any power to decide anything.
[Amit Varma]: Every other minister, first of all, has a secretary or a senior civil service that bypasses
[Amit Varma]: him and goes and reports to the prime minister's office under Mr. Modi.
[Amit Varma]: And second, the decisions are made with Mr. Modi's stamp and not that of the minister
[Amit Varma]: himself or herself, with the result that ultimately it almost doesn't matter when you speak of
[Amit Varma]: minimum government and maximum governance, what you're seeing is maximum centralized
[Amit Varma]: government in the shape of the PMO, which is certainly the most top-down, most centralized
[Amit Varma]: PMO we've seen since Indira Gandhi's emergency.
[Amit Varma]: And you have at the same time inefficient governance, which is actually not maximum
[Amit Varma]: governance or minimum governance, because a lot of decisions keep pending since the
[Amit Varma]: people in the PMO are human beings and there's a limit to how many files they can process.
[Amit Varma]: And so this government has the worst record in the filling of vacancies in the history
[Amit Varma]: of democratic India, because every blessed vacancy has to be filled with the approval
[Amit Varma]: of the PMO.
[Amit Varma]: And lots and lots and lots of vacancies, everything from administrative tribunals to the Information
[Amit Varma]: Commission to various other governmental bodies, pend and pend for weeks and months on end,
[Amit Varma]: because there just isn't time for the staff of the PMO who are making 2,000 other decisions
[Amit Varma]: at the same time to also deal with this.
[Guest]: Now, when it came to your opposition to 377 or your equally principled opposition to the
[Guest]: death penalty, you were sort of like a lone voice in the political landscape.
[Guest]: Is that also the case on the issue of minimum government?
[Guest]: Or, you know, is there a chance that we'll actually see a much smaller ministry if the
[Guest]: Congress does come to power?
[Amit Varma]: No, sir, I'm afraid you won't, because I think the logic of the Congress party would be that,
[Amit Varma]: especially since it's going to be almost certainly a coalition government, and especially if
[Amit Varma]: it is a coalition government, that portfolios have to be sufficiently numerous in order
[Amit Varma]: to keep various constituent elements happy.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I don't think my ideas will go very far with a coalition government.
[Amit Varma]: My most radical idea, which I am truly alone, but which I'm convinced would be beneficial
[Amit Varma]: for this country, is to scrap the parliamentary system altogether and go for clear separation
[Amit Varma]: of powers between the legislature and the executive, elect an executive president in
[Amit Varma]: the center and an executive chief minister or governor in the states, and an elected,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, mayor in the towns as well, who would actually be invulnerable to the whims
[Amit Varma]: of a legislative majority, but would be able to have a free hand, plus the free budgetary
[Amit Varma]: authority, to actually do whatever they promised in their campaigns to do and be held accountable
[Amit Varma]: four or five years later.
[Amit Varma]: Well they would be challenged by a legislature.
[Amit Varma]: The legislature would reflect all the diverse interests in India today.
[Amit Varma]: And so you'd have more or less the same kind of parliament you have, except that parliament
[Amit Varma]: would not be constituting the executive.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it would be completely separate from the executive, would be questioning the executive
[Amit Varma]: and holding it accountable on a day-to-day basis.
[Amit Varma]: And it would actually be a far, far better system for the diversity of our country, and
[Amit Varma]: at the same time a more efficient system, because the president could get on and get
[Amit Varma]: work done instead of spending all his or her time in staying in power, which is what Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Modi has been doing with his five years in office.
[Guest]: And do you think something like that will ever be possible?
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'm afraid, you know, major constitutional change of that nature requires a world-class
[Amit Varma]: crisis to come about.
[Amit Varma]: I don't see it happening quite so easily.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, if there ever were a national cataclysm, a nuclear war or something, God
[Amit Varma]: forbid, I don't want to want to ever happen, but if it did, and we literally had to build
[Amit Varma]: up the pieces from rubble, this option should present itself to any sensible rethink at
[Amit Varma]: that point.
[Amit Varma]: And so I'm happy to lay it out there for posterity.
[Guest]: I know we're running short of time and you have to get somewhere.
[Guest]: So we'll quickly run through the rest of the paradoxes of Mr. Modi that you point out.
[Guest]: Paradox to federalism, that there was a time where he claimed to be a believer in federalism,
[Guest]: especially when he was the chief minister of Gujarat, of course.
[Guest]: But he's acted in quite contrary ways once he's actually come to power at the center.
[Amit Varma]: Precisely.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, as chief minister of Gujarat, he opposed anything that he could see as an
[Amit Varma]: encroachment on state's rights, whether it was the counterterrorism center, whether it
[Amit Varma]: was the Aadhaar implementation, whether it was GST, which he said took away the state's
[Amit Varma]: rights to tax on the punish producer states, as he called them and so on.
[Amit Varma]: The moment he becomes prime minister, somehow everything changes.
[Amit Varma]: And as I joked, where you stand depends on where you sit.
[Amit Varma]: He's sitting in Delhi in the prime minister's office and his stand is completely changed.
[Guest]: That's really well said.
[Guest]: Another Modi paradox is his desire to portray himself as a modern, tech friendly prime minister,
[Guest]: but at the same time, this constant harking back to a glorious past, which is, of course,
[Guest]: kind of mythical.
[Guest]: And these two sort of collide in very awkward, uncomfortable ways, like his mention of how
[Guest]: we did the first plastic surgery, which was Ganesha and so on.
[Guest]: My broader question really here is beyond this obvious contradiction is that why is
[Guest]: it that glorious past is such a key part of these kind of populist narratives, not just
[Guest]: in India, but elsewhere as well?
[Amit Varma]: Well, in India, there is a complete worldview which Modi has internalized and which is fundamental
[Amit Varma]: to his thinking about the nature of the country, which is that India was this glorious, you
[Amit Varma]: know, golden bird that got despoiled when the evil Muslims and then the evil Christians
[Amit Varma]: came in and blocked its wings and despoiled it.
[Amit Varma]: And that now a Hindu Hriday Samaraj has come back to restore this forgotten glory.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if that is your narrative and that's your basic view of the history of India, which
[Amit Varma]: I'm afraid it is, because when I wrote my book An Era of Darkness Attacking British
[Amit Varma]: Colonialism, Modi, while hailing it, was making speeches about 1,200 years of foreign rule,
[Amit Varma]: which I don't agree with, because to my mind, the Mughals and the other Muslim rulers before
[Amit Varma]: them came to this country, settled here, and even if they did exploit or loot, they spent
[Amit Varma]: the products of their exploitation and loot in India.
[Amit Varma]: And they created some of the most beautiful buildings, architecture, monuments and cultural
[Amit Varma]: legacies of which we are all the inheritors today.
[Amit Varma]: So to my mind, they're not foreigners.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas the British as imperialists did drain our resources to build their country, and
[Amit Varma]: they didn't work in the interests of this country, but rather of their own.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a difference.
[Amit Varma]: Now, having said all of that, if Mr. Modi's view of Indian history is what it is that
[Amit Varma]: I've summarized to you, then a whole set of corollaries follow from it.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, that you've got to glorify that past, because it was so great.
[Amit Varma]: So everything about it is made to look fantastic in order to diminish what followed.
[Amit Varma]: Second, you have to demonize the successors of those whom you despise for having done
[Amit Varma]: terrible things to your country, and therefore you demonize Muslims and Christians.
[Amit Varma]: And third, you present yourself as the one who is restoring a gloried, fabled past.
[Amit Varma]: So you are not merely sort of advocating something new.
[Amit Varma]: You are coming back to ancient glories.
[Amit Varma]: But you are doing so using all the technologies available to you in the 21st century, because
[Amit Varma]: India is not going to be second to anybody when it comes to technology.
[Amit Varma]: So as I joked in the book, the image you sought to portray is of a leader who is comfortable
[Amit Varma]: clicking a mouse with one hand while brandishing a threshold with the other.
[Guest]: That's a brilliant image.
[Guest]: I'll quickly run through three of the other paradoxes I noted, and then I can get to some
[Guest]: more questions to end the show with.
[Guest]: The seventh paradox I found was where you, you know, you've quoted Modi saying to you,
[Guest]: in fact, that how much he likes criticism, and he wants people to criticize and that
[Guest]: makes the government stronger and all that.
[Guest]: But at the same time, in practice, what we found is that he foments in-house trolls,
[Guest]: he can be very petty and vindictive when it comes to, you know, people who criticize him
[Guest]: and completely in the other direction.
[Guest]: And a similar hypocrisy is when he speaks about how parliamentary debate is good, and
[Guest]: it strengthens the nation and so on.
[Guest]: But at the same time, the BJP has been second to none in disrupting parliament over time.
[Guest]: And you also point out that it's not entirely their fault that you know, the anti-defection
[Guest]: law of 1985 sort of made and I've had an episode on just that law in the past, and sort of
[Guest]: made it compulsory for parliamentarians to vote with the party whip.
[Guest]: And the natural consequence of that would be that parliamentary debate would necessarily
[Guest]: go down because it became inconsequential.
[Guest]: You could actually taut up the votes according to an Excel sheet.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: So my many objections to the parliamentary system include that precise detail of the
[Amit Varma]: way it works in our country, where thanks to the anti-defection law, because that was
[Amit Varma]: of course passed with very good intentions to prevent unprincipled defections, we've
[Amit Varma]: now created a situation where the individual legislator is no longer allowed to speak his
[Amit Varma]: mind or vote his conscience, but is obliged to adhere to the whip of his party, failing
[Amit Varma]: which he could actually lose a seat in parliament that he's worked so hard to win.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore he swallows his words and bites his tongue in order to prevent that kind of
[Amit Varma]: consequence for him.
[Amit Varma]: I do believe it's damaged the principle of representation very greatly.
[Amit Varma]: But that's gotten you away from the paradoxes of Mr. Moody, which you're quite right to
[Amit Varma]: point to that he does have these various paradoxes.
[Amit Varma]: You also should take the paradox of his great talent for publicity and self-promotion using
[Amit Varma]: the world media and his refusal to be accountable to the media in the form of a press conference.
[Amit Varma]: He's the only prime minister in his entire five years who has never held a press conference.
[Amit Varma]: He only wants scripted questions.
[Amit Varma]: And when even in interaction with his own party workers, he was asked an uncomfortable
[Amit Varma]: question, his discomfort and his refusal to answer was an embarrassment.
[Amit Varma]: This is very much at odds with somebody who claims to be an easygoing, frank, accessible,
[Guest]: dissent-tolerating individual.
[Guest]: And sort of moving on from the paradoxes, you also talk about how the Hindutva vision
[Guest]: of the world, which, you know, Moditwa also plays into is a very masculine vision where
[Guest]: he boasts about his 56 inch ki chhati and you know, for all the noises they make about
[Guest]: making India safer for women, their attitude seems very misogynistic in the sense that,
[Guest]: like you said in your book, they view women as goddesses or mothers, both to be worshipped
[Guest]: and protected, but they have no concept of how to deal with women who are neither.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And this whole business of women's equality, and that's linked to women's safety as well,
[Amit Varma]: is exacerbated by the galloping onset of modernity because people are suddenly finding women,
[Amit Varma]: especially, you know, people moving from rural India, from relatively traditional lives to
[Amit Varma]: cities are seeing women dressed in ways that they've never seen, behaving in ways with
[Amit Varma]: a degree of freedom and autonomy that they've never seen or got used to, leading independent
[Amit Varma]: lives, walking alone and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And because they're unable to adjust to and cope with this, because they've never been
[Amit Varma]: trained to respect women as anything other than as mothers or goddesses, they've ended
[Amit Varma]: up, I'm afraid, assaulting many of these women.
[Amit Varma]: So even women's safety is linked to this inability to recognize the equality of women.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this is part of a social paradox that goes beyond Modi.
[Amit Varma]: Modi's masculinity is actually partly affectation.
[Amit Varma]: As I pointed out in the book, the 56 inch chest where an Atchikan needed to be stitched
[Amit Varma]: turned out to actually be 50.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a lot of exaggeration there in that masculinity.
[Amit Varma]: And certainly, you know, yoga rather than bodybuilding is his thing.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't think we need to detain ourselves too long on those tropes.
[Amit Varma]: But part of this, called the muscularity that the Hindutva movement needs to advertise to
[Amit Varma]: show its inherent superiority to others.
[Amit Varma]: So the masculinity is caught up in the muscularity, in the militaristic language and jingoism,
[Amit Varma]: in the praise for the army, often not matched by actual concrete support for the armed forces.
[Amit Varma]: But all of these things are part of this Hindutva assertiveness, which is what passes for right-wing
[Amit Varma]: ideology in our country today.
[Guest]: And you know, there's a quote from you in your book, which really struck me when you
[Guest]: were talking about the difference between Hinduism as it is and Hinduism as, Hinduism
[Guest]: as a different political parties kind of view it, where you talk about how the view of it
[Guest]: evolved, quote, from the soft Brahmanism of the Congress Party to the tough Kshatriya
[Guest]: warrior tradition, stop quote.
[Guest]: And we've already discussed and agreed on why there is a problem with that tough Kshatriya
[Guest]: warrior tradition, so to say.
[Guest]: But I also found the phrase soft Brahmanism of the Congress Party, you know, mildly disturbing,
[Guest]: which leads me to my next question.
[Guest]: And I don't want to, you know, sort of put you in a sort of spot.
[Amit Varma]: But when we talk about
[Amit Varma]: That wasn't my characterization, but the RSS's and Golwalkar say things like, you know, look
[Amit Varma]: at how all our Hindu gods are shown with weapons.
[Amit Varma]: What is all this Gandhi and Ahimsa talk?
[Amit Varma]: You know, we are a militaristic people.
[Amit Varma]: So they saw this as soft Brahmanism.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, the principal Congress leaders were not only Brahmins.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, Nehruji was, Panditji was a Brahmin, but Gandhiji and Sardar Patel were not.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I think one shouldn't generalize on the caste front of the Congress Party.
[Guest]: That's my bad.
[Guest]: I shouldn't have attributed that to you.
[Guest]: Apologies for that.
[Guest]: It was my paraphrase of what they felt.
[Guest]: Fair enough.
[Guest]: I buy that.
[Guest]: And, you know, my sort of larger question to you is that, aren't there paradoxes that
[Guest]: go beyond Mr. Modi to your own party?
[Guest]: For example, Rahul Gandhi talks of inner party democracy, but he's himself an unelected leader.
[Guest]: They talk against the communalism of the BJP, but they are also pursuing that Hindu vote
[Amit Varma]: bank as you know, through the trips to Kedarnath.
[Amit Varma]: There are differences there.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'll be brief because I am now well past the hour mark that we discussed.
[Amit Varma]: But just to say that, number one, as far as the inner party democracy argument is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: you're right, absolutely, there is no widespread electoral process.
[Amit Varma]: But you're wrong in the sense that anyone in the Congress will tell you that if you
[Amit Varma]: had a free and fair election tomorrow amongst Congress workers and put any Congress leader
[Amit Varma]: you can name against Rahul Gandhi, that person would lose to Rahul Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: The party, the party workers, the party organization wants a son of the Gandhi Nehru family to
[Amit Varma]: lead it.
[Amit Varma]: And that is definitely the case.
[Amit Varma]: And if there was a perception at one point that Rahul Gandhi was a reluctant leader,
[Amit Varma]: it's partially because he had been press ganged into this to a great extent by the demands
[Amit Varma]: of party workers.
[Amit Varma]: So that's on the first point.
[Amit Varma]: On the second point, I would disagree respectfully because I don't think what the Congress is
[Amit Varma]: doing is soft Hindutva, as has been alleged.
[Amit Varma]: It is very much the advocacy of an inclusive Hinduism as opposed to the kind of exclusionary
[Amit Varma]: and bigoted Hindutva that the BJP practices and propagates.
[Amit Varma]: So when the communal polarization is thought to be attempted by the BJP, though when they
[Amit Varma]: speak of Hindutva, we don't want to share that space with them.
[Amit Varma]: But when they say we're the only party that respects Hinduism, Hindu culture and speaks
[Amit Varma]: up for Hindu interests, we turn around and say, what are you talking about?
[Amit Varma]: They go to temples, we go to temples too.
[Amit Varma]: We worship and respect the same things you do.
[Amit Varma]: So now that we've neutralized that argument, can we set that aside and talk about vikas?
[Amit Varma]: Can we talk about whether you're a chidinavakam?
[Amit Varma]: Can we talk about the kind of conditions that you've been reduced to by this government?
[Amit Varma]: So it's not Hinduism in the sense of Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: It is Hinduism as a tactic to neutralize a particularly potent part of the BJP's appeal
[Amit Varma]: in order to focus on the issues that we believe really matter to the Indian voter.
[Guest]: Fair enough.
[Guest]: I won't ask any more follow up questions on this particular subject because I know we're
[Guest]: running out of time.
[Guest]: One final question before I end, which is really a two part question.
[Guest]: Given both the politics of this country and given the social scenario where we have a
[Guest]: jobs crisis, we have an agricultural crisis and, you know, the demographic dividend, so
[Guest]: to say, is turning out to be a demographic disaster.
[Guest]: Given all of this, what makes you hope and what makes you despair about India in the
[Guest]: next 10 years?
[Amit Varma]: What makes me hope is the extraordinary capacity of the Indian people, you know, and I've lived
[Amit Varma]: around the world and I've seen Indians thrive and succeed everywhere, and there's something
[Amit Varma]: about us as a people.
[Amit Varma]: We are by and large quick learners, hard workers, effective result producers, except it seems
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: And we need to get our act together here better, partly because the systems have held us down.
[Amit Varma]: We need to improve those.
[Amit Varma]: But the second reason I'm hopeful is because I do see change.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, change has occurred.
[Amit Varma]: As I said earlier, in a different context, the India I grew up in is not the India I
[Amit Varma]: return to, and it cuts right across the board in politics and economics and social and cultural
[Amit Varma]: relations, in caste equations, you name it.
[Amit Varma]: There have been some real changes.
[Amit Varma]: Some changes have been for the worse.
[Amit Varma]: The growing communalization has shocked me because I hear things being said from public
[Amit Varma]: platforms that when I was young would have been impolite to express even behind closed
[Amit Varma]: doors in private living rooms.
[Amit Varma]: So there is now a change in that communal discourse that I think is deplorable.
[Amit Varma]: But for the most part, the changes that have occurred have been positive.
[Amit Varma]: I find a very self-confident India that genuinely believes it can hold its own with the rest
[Amit Varma]: of the world.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not too worried.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that the capacity for self-correction that our democracy gives us means that where
[Amit Varma]: we've gone wrong in the last five years, or if you want to say it, in the last 10 years,
[Amit Varma]: can be corrected in the next five or the next 10.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that the elections offer the Indian public a chance to correct that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, striking one of the paradoxes you and I never discussed was the paradox that
[Amit Varma]: we have at the helm of the nation somebody who is perhaps the most eloquent rhetorician
[Amit Varma]: who has featured on the Indian political stage since independence, at least in Hindi, the
[Amit Varma]: most eloquent and compelling orator.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, when some of the defining moments in the insecurity of our fellow Indians has
[Amit Varma]: occurred, the suicide of Rohit Memla, the flogging of those Dalits in Jaipur, the murder
[Amit Varma]: of Pahelwa Khan on YouTube, the murder of an Indian Air Force, Haridwar's father, Mohammed
[Amit Varma]: Lakhlaq on the suspicion of carrying beef, etc., etc., the horrendous number of cow vigilante
[Amit Varma]: Bob lynchings, all of these things have happened.
[Amit Varma]: This eloquent rhetorician has gone mysteriously silent.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that paradox points to one of the biggest defects of the Modi approach.
[Amit Varma]: Modi is diagnosing the problems of India very effectively in his speeches, blaming them
[Amit Varma]: all on the past, of course, rather than on himself.
[Amit Varma]: But then, when it comes to providing moral leadership through his words, he has gone
[Amit Varma]: silent on us.
[Amit Varma]: I think what we need in this country is a leadership that is both inclusive and cooperative,
[Amit Varma]: that actually provides a certain moral direction, but that derives its strength from the Indian
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: Instead of a prime minister who portrays himself as sort of hero on a white stallion, charging
[Amit Varma]: down with upraised swords, saying, I know all the answers to all your problems, and
[Amit Varma]: I shall cut through the Gordian knots that are tying you down, and we've seen how well
[Amit Varma]: that has worked or failed to work in the last four and a half years, you have instead an
[Amit Varma]: alternative style of leadership that says, listen, I don't know all the answers, and
[Amit Varma]: I'm coming on foot.
[Amit Varma]: I don't have a stallion to ride on.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm going to listen to you telling me what your problems are, and I'll come accompanied
[Amit Varma]: by a very deep-bent strength of diverse, able, experienced people who will work with me and
[Amit Varma]: work with you to solve your problems.
[Amit Varma]: That is the alternative the opposition and the Congress Party in particular is offering.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what gives me hope.
[Amit Varma]: I think that kind of collective, cooperative effort can genuinely produce a better India
[Guest]: in the next decade.
[Guest]: Mr. Tharoor, thank you so much for being so generous with your time and good luck in 2019.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to Amazon or your nearest bookstore
[Guest]: and pick up The Paradoxical Prime Minister by Shashi Tharoor or any of his other books.
[Guest]: You can follow him on Twitter at Shashi Tharoor.
[Guest]: That's it, just his name.
[Guest]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Guest]: And you can listen to past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Advertising is dead.
[Unknown]: Yep, you heard me right.
[Unknown]: We're all in the content business now.
[Unknown]: Let's not call it news, TV, radio, etc, etc.
[Unknown]: It's all content.
[Unknown]: And we're in the middle of this weirdly exciting phase where all the borders and lines that
[Unknown]: have been drawn over decades has been swept away by this lovely thing called the internet.
[Unknown]: Where I assure you, we don't dwell on just the stuff that is now, but rather the wider
[Unknown]: stuff about advertising, media, content and the whole goddamn circus surrounding it.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Tuesday for our weekly unboxing of the mystery box we used to call advertising.
[Unknown]: I'm Varun Duggirala, co-founder and content chief at The Glitch.
[Unknown]: And this is my new podcast, Advertising is Dead.
[Unknown]: Did I just catch you on your way to work?
[Unknown]: Or did you end up pulling an all-nighter?
[Unknown]: Let me guess, you have a packed schedule for the day, the week, and probably the month
[Unknown]: and the year.
[Unknown]: That's a lot for your mind to handle, don't you think?
[Unknown]: This buzzing chaos also brings tons of negative thoughts, am I right?
[Unknown]: Try spinning that bottle in a positive direction with me, Chetna, on the Positively Unlimited
[Unknown]: podcast, every Monday on IBM Podcast.
[Unknown]: It's time to change your life, one alphabet at a time.